# QSS 20 Final Project
 
Project Option
• SIPS: Short Term, Assessment, Response, Treatment (START) 

Your project’s main questions
Our project will focus on analyzing patient experiences within the START program. Firstly, we will analyze the demographic composition of START participants: looking at the race, gender, and living situation. Next, we will look at how demographics correlate with ac- cess to and satisfaction with services. Some questions include: How do the demographics (measured above) correlate with satisfaction of mental health services received, aggressive behavior, or crisis events? We will also focus on the three primary goals of START services: Access, Appropriateness, and Accountability. Looking at “Access,” we will look at where individuals are primarily receiving their mental health services, and access to in-patient psy- chiatric services. For “Appropriateness,” we will analyze: Are patients generally satisfied with the mental health care their family member is receiving? There are many different vari- ables that we can look at individually or aggregate to determine this question. Lastly, for “Accountability,” we will investigate if START services are attaining their primary goals of supporting individuals with intellectual/developmental disabilities and mental health needs. We will also investigate the current areas of the START program patients/families are sat- isfied and dissatisfied with. Furthermore, we will evaluate how often patients encounter law enforcement or self-harming behaviors, and if these changed over time. We will also look at trends, comparing hospital visits, appointment lengths, overall satisfaction, etc. to before and after the COVID-19, as well as the full time-length from 2010-present.

3 Your project’s data sources/relevant fields
The data contains demographic information about the participants, including gender, race, ethnicity, level of intellectual disability, and age. It also contains details about their liv- ing situation at enrollment, including whether they lived in multiple places recently, and information about their caregivers. The data also contains information about the partici- pants’ health and behavior, including psychiatric and medical medical diagnoses, history of psychiatric hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and law enforcement encounters. It also details services received at enrollment and funding sources of those services. Additionally, the data contains details about the participants’ educational status, such as grade level, IEP/504 plan, and school setting. It also contains information about any history of child protective services involvement and about any past incarceration. With this range of information, the data can be analyzed to understand the characteristics and needs of the START participants, as well as factors that might impact their outcomes and experiences with the program.

4 Learn from an earlier project on your research topic
A previous project using the START data, “Mental Disability and COVID-19: Instances of Aggression Before and During the Pandemic”, examined the relationship between COVID-19 pandemic and aggressive behaviors. They used reports of mental health crises made to the START program to evaluate instances of aggression. Based on their report, we learned how to thoughtfully merge datasets to best answer research questions. When they merged the START Demographics and Emergency Crisis Services datasets, they were intentional about which data points they wanted to keep in the merge. Specifically, they only kept participants who were included in the Emergency Crisis Services data since it was not as extensive as the complete Demographics dataset. In addition, they merged the data with COVID-19 case and death counts per 1,000 people at the county level. This additional COVID-19 data provided more depth to their analysis and allowed them to explore the relationship between mental health crises and the COVID-19 pandemic. They also spent time cleaning their data, such as extracting state and county names, and added dummy variables to represent categorical information.
One weakness of the report is the presentation and conclusion of their results. The results from their Difference of Proportions test were presented in a table and in a bar graph. First, they examined the relationship between emergency calls due to aggression before the pandemic and during the pandemic. They calculated a test statistic of 1.689 with a p-value of 0.0911. Typically, statistical significance is considered at the 95% confidence level, with a p-value less than or equal to 0.05. Their test would not be considered statistically significant with this threshold, but instead they used a confidence level of 90%, which is not as salient. In addition, they argue that there was a significant difference in proportions of emergency aggression cases before and after the pandemic, but the bars representing the respective proportions in their visualization appear to be very similar, not supporting their conclusion. Therefore, we think that this representation and the conclusion of their results are not very strong.

5 Your project’s anticipated challenges
We may have difficulty in determining which factors influence access, appropriateness, and accountability, and how their intersection might increase or decrease this influence. In regards to access, it may be hard to ascertain which demographics affect access to services most strongly, because of the additional impact that COVID had on medical services. In regards to appropriateness, it will be difficult to decide how to interpret patient satisfaction. Although there is a question about patient satisfaction, there is no way to determine what influenced the level of satisfaction most strongly, as there are many components that factor into the decision, including service opportunity, medical contact, professional understanding, and caretaking recognition. Each patient’s background is unique, and most will likely have different values for each factor that affect their satisfaction. In regards to accountability, it similarly may be difficult to isolate the variables that most directly relate to how the START services support individuals. There are many different ways that the patients are supported, and so it will be hard to decide how each factor should be weighed due to their intersection.